docs: initial start of the maintainership docs under the bounty program (#1894)
asyncapi/community: docs/maintainership-guide/general-information/mentor/roles-and-responsibility.md

---

> title: Mentors Roles And Responsibilty

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Mentors Roles and Responsibilities
```

weight: 50
---

> _At AsyncAPI, we believe mentorship is one of the most effective ways to teach, upskill, and empower contributors in open source. When done right, it creates not just transformative learning experiences for contributors, but also long-lasting value and growth for mentors._

> Mentors are the foundation of the AsyncAPI Maintainership Program, without their expertise, guidance, and commitment, the program simply wouldn’t exist. They are not just technical experts; they are community members and leaders who embody the spirit of open collaboration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mentors are the foundation of the AsyncAPI Maintainership Program; without their expertise, guidance, and commitment, the program wouldn’t exist. They are not just technical experts; they are community members and leaders who embody the spirit of open collaboration.
```

All AMP mentors are (or should be) trusted members of the AsyncAPI community and passionate advocates for open source. They bring deep knowledge of the ecosystem and a strong belief in the values of Free and Open Source Software (FOSS).

Mentors role goes beyond just technical guidance — mentors help shape a culture of inclusion, sustainability, and authentic contribution in open source.

Below are the key responsibilities and expectations for mentors:
## Project Planning

> - Define a clear project scope with achievable, measurable goals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Define a clear project scope with achievable and measurable goals.
```

- Break the project into milestones that align with the program timeline.

> - Prepare a list of actionable tasks/issues for contributors to work on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Prepare a list of actionable tasks or issues for contributors to work on.
```

- Set up the development environment and share necessary tools, documentation, and onboarding resources.

## Contributor Onboarding

- Create a welcoming, inclusive, and supportive space for learning.
- Provide a clear introduction to the project — including codebase structure, contribution guidelines, and documentation.
- Clarify expectations around communication cadence, feedback loops, and availability.

## Communication

- Review contributor eligibility and project fit early on.
- Schedule regular check-ins (weekly or bi-weekly) to sync on progress.
- Provide prompt, thoughtful feedback on pull requests, documentation, and designs.
- Be inclusive, empathetic, and open to feedback from contributors.
- Proactively support contributors through blockers or challenges.
- Responsiveness towards contributors challenges and blockers

> - Check-in on the mentee periodically (especially if there has been no recent contact from mentee)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check in on the mentee periodically (especially if there has been no recent contact from the mentee)
```

> - Follow up periodically, especially if a contributor goes silent — to re-engage and offer support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Follow up periodically, especially if a contributor goes silent, to re-engage and offer support.
```

## Guidance & Growth

- Mentor contributors on both technical skills and open source best practices (e.g., writing good issues, clean PRs, and performing reviews).
- Encourage independent thinking while being available for support.
- Promote transparency, collaboration, and ethical contribution practices.
- Encourage long-term involvement in the open source ecosystem beyond the program.

### Evaluation & Recognition

- Track contributor progress consistently throughout the program.
- Complete mid-term and final evaluations with honest, constructive feedback.

> - Nominate exceptional contributors for community shout-outs and potential future roles (e.g., triager, maintainer).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Nominate exceptional contributors for community shout-outs and potential future roles, such as triagers and maintainers.
```
